They were people who were physically
disqualified, but for some reason that I've
forgotten were still eligible to go to school. But
just five people who were not a member of the Corps.
Then everybody, essentially everyone, got equal
treatment, whether it was mistreatment or not.
But when you have a core of 2,000 or 3,000 out of
35,000 or even out of 4,000 for that matter, that's
an entirely different situation. And while I
would like to see the benefits of what I consider
benefits of hazing be a part of the school,
under the conditions that we have now, I don't see
how in the world it possibly could be.
So it's for lack of an answer to that question that I
have to agree that we shouldn't have. Okay. Now,
what do you see as the benefits of hazing?
Under the circumstances that it was possible to do
so, I see I think several benefits of it.
I have to
say here that when I say hazing, it's not just
hazing as such. It is the discipline that is
enforced in part by hazing. Hazing becomes a part
of that discipline. Hazing per se I don't see any
benefit in. But as it relates to that discipline,
it teaches people how to think, teach them how to be
patient. It teaches how to remember names, as one
little example. It teaches you, the young kid at
that time,
that damn it, you have some backbone if you can just
find a way to use it. It teaches you you can have some
patience. You don't have to blow off the handle. As
a matter of fact, it teaches you you better find a
way to do it. And a number of things that it teaches
you, I think, that are very, very good. And they are
particularly so if you're going to be into an
occupation where these kinds of things are
important, such as in the military, flying
airplanes,
in the missile business, in the space business,
things that require really almost in some cases
superhuman discipline of mind and thought, and
certainly control of your physical actions. And I
just think it contributes, properly done,
contributes a great deal in that respect at that
time in your life. Needless to say, I don't think I
need anybody to beat me over the head at this age
about that. Sounds like hazing was one of the
things that you liked about the Corps. What were
other things that you liked about being in the
Corps? Well, yes, I did like it. I mean, I liked what
I stood for, yes. I don't think it's a highlight.
Well, I think I just have to say I liked almost
everything about the Corps. It provided a means of
association with others and a very
constructive way. It provided the structure for
social activities, which involved other people,
bringing people from outside, girls, parents,
spectators, all kinds of people. It provided an
outlet to a great deal of knowledge and kinds of
knowledge that most of us at that time had had no
opportunity to observe, even. Unless you lived in
San Antonio, one would probably never see a
military unit, even marching, much less in
action.
And so I enjoyed the horses. I was in the field
artillery and of course it was horse drawn at that
time. Sure. And
I loved horses. I had grown up with them. I had
broken horses.
So that was very interesting. As a result of the
horses being available, we had horse shows,
jumping contests, and all these kinds of things,
which I participated in and won several of them.
Did you like the uniform?
The uniform, per se, to me was a necessity, not
necessarily a necessary evil, but it was a
necessity, and I had to admit that it
was good for several other points of view. I
certainly couldn't have bought suits or clothes
to wear during that period of time.
all of us, I think, would always remake whatever
uniform we had because we didn't like the
particular things about it. But we most likely
wouldn't do any better, so that you can just say is a
normal crime.
Yes, overall I can say I liked the uniform. I didn't
go out and try to strut it or anything like that, but
it was distinct you. At least somebody didn't ask
you if you were from Georgia Tech or something. You
didn't come walking down the street. Was there
anything about being in the Corps that you
disliked?
No, I don't think so. When I was a brand new freshman
I could think of several things, but overall I
don't think there was nothing that that I didn't
like about it. Did you ever gain a position of
leadership in the Corps? Well, I guess it depends
on
what they call leadership. I thought so. What was
it? In my junior year, I was the first sergeant of
this Battery D field artillery. And in my senior
year, I was the battalion commander of the second
battalion of field artillery.
Those are pretty coveted jobs. I don't know I'm
always interested in when young men start to
assume, young men who become generals start to
assume leadership roles. When was that for you?
Oh, I guess it was while I was here. In the Corps. I
think so. I think so.
I'm thinking back on your career. What ways do you
think that being in the Corps helped you become a
general?
I think it taught
one how to recognize things that were important at
an earlier time. It
also taught that there was an answer to a problem if
it came up and it gave you a direction to go and and
solving that problem not an understanding of
people
but i think one's effectiveness in
getting to the bottom of most any problem as an
understanding of the people who are working with
that problem, and the people who have to be
convinced about it in order to get a solution to it.
And one's association in the core
certainly helped with that knowledge, helped
develop that knowledge.
both with respect to those that you're working
with as well as those you were working for.
So it helped you deal with people. Yes. Know
people, understand people.
Most of the problems have to do with just that. Do
you think that there was any way in which being in
the Corps hindered your career?
No, I can't think of any way that it could have
hindered my career. Not in any way. Okay. Do you
think it had, you've already said that it seemed to
have some impact on your becoming a leader. Yes, I
think it had a very substantial impact.
Okay. Let's talk for a minute about the
professional soldiers that were at A&M at the
time. Do you remember any of these professional
soldiers and how did they help you? I certainly do
remember.
They helped me in many ways. The commandant at the
time was a man, Colonel Nelson. known as Bull
Nelson because he was the commandant and
therefore the bull, but and needless to say I
didn't get to know him very well.
The tactical officer for the field artillery was a
major Sloan at that time, a very exacting and
good field artillery officer. The tactical
officer of our, my unit
was a Captain T.C. Harry
and he was an older officer, retired shortly after
he left A&M.
but an absolutely wonderful man with a wonderful
wife and he was here the whole four years that I was
here and I think some while after I was gone but at
least for those four years and while I was here I met
a girl over in Huntsville who was later my wife and
she came over to visit me at various times and would
stay at their house. They lived off campus in
what's now the town of Palisades, the city of
Palisades.
And so I got to know them as wonderful people, real
fine people. The title clause for the Corps of
Engineers here at the time was Captain Pick. who
was later General Pick and in charge of building
the Burma Road, and later still of course became
chief of engineers. When Captain Pick was
here as a captain, and I was first sergeant of a
battery,
we had a substantial disagreement about who was
present for Reveille. and
he raised an uncommon amount of hell about it. With
the result that I had to go to Major Sloan, who was a
field artillery officer and explain it, which I
did. And got the thing cleared up, but with some
pretty hard feelings.
When I was in India,
as Deputy Chief of Operations for the Air Force.
Colonel Pick was working on the Verma Road and I
went down to see him as a Brigadier General to talk
with him. We got things straightened out,
everything was fine, but it was kind of an ironic
meeting.
Major Sloan went on to Italy during the war and had
command of a division there. I didn't find out what
happened to him after the war, so I don't know where
he was, but he was a major general there in command
of the division and the last I heard of him. A real
fine man. What influence did they have on you?
Well, different in all of the cases, I guess. Major
Sloan left a lasting impression of military
efficiency in my mind.
And Captain Harry, one of adequate military
efficiency, but one of deep human understanding.
both qualities were very good, I thought. They
were very plus. And
I noticed the same qualities in varying degrees
with the other types of classes. There were
several others here, not just those three that I
mentioned. How about the quality of training, as
far as the artillery was concerned? I thought it
was very good. very good. In retrospect, I don't
quite see how it was so good because it was quite
realistic with all things considered. We had the
guns, the caissons, the horses, the harness, the
everything else, and we hooked them up and drilled
them and deployed and did all the things that you
would do in war, including firing. We didn't fire
here, we fired over at Camp Bullock, but we did
everything. And I thought the quality of the
training was very good.
It was the tools that you work with, and a number of
other things changed a long time before World War
II came on. Sure, absolutely. It was still fairly
good. What did you think of the quality of Second
Lieutenant that came out of A&M back then? Well,
since I was one of them, I thought it was very high.
But watching it since that time, I still think it's
very high, very high by comparison to others.
Okay, let's compare it with some of the others.
Let's compare it with some of the other ROTC
schools like VMI or some of the others like
Virginia Tech or Georgia Tech. Well, I've had some
jobs since then that put me in contact with those
various schools in their ROTC matters and all. and
without any desire to be derogatory in the
slightest way, because they have some wonderful
people and a wonderful program. Most of them just
do not have the capacity to expose their students,
young second lieutenants coming up, to the kind of
experiences and realism that we have here to do.
They just can't do it. all these things cost money,
and it's a very precious commodity in most of these
places, because the military schools all over the
country just do not get the kind of support that
they need to have, and don't get the kind of support
that A&M provides for itself in one way or another.
So I still think they're the best. When I say
comparative,
the one out of West Point doesn't have any edge on
these as far as I know. Okay, so let's talk for a
minute about the ones out of West Point. How would
you compare their training? I haven't been
through West Point training. No, but of course
you've met tons of West Point second lieutenants.
And you've had them work for you. Yes, I have.
they are very good and they are very well trained.
But I don't feel that they're any better trained
than they are out of A&M. And
in terms of their relationship with people, I'm
not sure they're as astute or as sensitive to it as
our people out of here are. What do you mean by that?
If you're attuned to
deal with people,
when someone discusses something with you, you
can be sympathetic enough to understand his
thinking and to have the proper respect for
whether you agree with it or not. Having done so,
then, you're in a very much better position to
influence this thinking to what it is that you want
it to be to get your job done, whatever that is. I
just don't think a lot of the people in West Point
can reach out and grasp this in a real
understanding way, and therefore not quite as
effective.
an A&M second lieutenant or an officer come on a
base and live with the people for a week, he usually
got them all in his hands.
The West Pointer, of course, some of them do.
They're exceptions to all of them. But most of them
are busy with other things and they aren't looking
too closely at that. And we don't really have that
rapport with the rest of the people they're
associated with. Often I've heard from military
men that there's a West Point club, a Ringknockers
club, and all of this stuff. What do you think about
that? Well,
I know that there is some of that. I've never been
really faced with it in any way that was bad, and so I
really don't have much thought about it. overall I
think it's not a good idea, but I can't cite that as
an example of why it isn't. But as far as career
advancement is concerned, do you think that West
Point people are favored over A&M as far as
advancing in the military? Well, I have to say it
depends on how many of their class are in
controlling positions when their number comes up
for promotion. Certainly there is some some
influence there. Overall, generally, I think
it's not really too significant.
But there is some.
I think the important thing there is that in our
military we keep a relative balance so that you
essentially eliminate that problem. What do you
mean a relative balance? Well, if Air Force, for
example, if they were composed entirely of West
Pointers or now Air Academy people,
there just wouldn't be room for guys from A&M or
other places. And they wouldn't get promoted, not
because people were trying to deal unfair with
them. It just doesn't work that way. As a practical
matter, it doesn't work that way. So, I think it
important to Air Force that they have infused into
their organization at all levels enough people to
keep this sort of thing from happening, whether it
be dominated by the Air Academy or dominated by A&M
or whoever. If we can keep enough in there to keep a
balance,
then it'll never be a problem. Let's talk about
your academic career at A&M.
What did you think of the quality of your
professors? Did you get very close to any of them? I
did get very close to them.
in the classroom sense. I didn't get close to it
socially or anything like that. But I must say that
as far as I'm concerned I had, for the most part, in
my professors, the most wonderful people I've
ever known, the most dedicated people I've ever
known, and very knowledgeable people, and they
would do nearly anything to see that you learned
what it was they were trying to teach.
And in chemical engineering, I had
the same professors a lot more, I think, than you
would have now in most courses. And some of them as
much as three years I'd have a course under them all
the time for three years, which I did have in the
case of Dr. Bauer and Dr. Jensen and some others.
And I just thought that I can't say enough good
things about them in terms of how they went about
their job, their dedication to their job, and
their ability as teachers. Then they were good.
You didn't have this problem around here, though,
that you have now. I mean, if you didn't want to
learn, no one was going to waste thirty minutes
fiddling with you. If you wanted to work and learn,
then you were willing really to work. Now, they'd
stay up all night or anything else you want. But
they didn't have time to fiddle with anybody who
was even lukewarm about it. You'd just get a zero
and go explain to somebody else why. Usually that
was a one-way ticket home. What did you think of
your student colleagues? Do you think they were
pretty good students? Were they really trying
hard? The people who were here? Yes,
if you remember in 28 to 32, it was about the
roughest, well I guess that the nation is known, I
don't know. And the people that were here were
mostly just by the skin of their teeth
financially. And if they didn't want to be here,
And one mention of this to most of their fathers,
I'm sure would have got them home in a hell of a
hurry. So as far as I'm concerned, the people who
were here as students at that time with just almost
negligible exception were really top notch
people in terms of wanting to do, wanting to learn,
and working real hard at doing that.
guess it's probably overall the hardest working
bunch of people that have probably ever been here.
It was pretty tough going as far as just making ends
meet. The school did everything in the world to
help us all, individually or otherwise, just to
stay here. Do you think that they did a good job as
far as educating you? Did you feel prepared to go
out and be an engineer when you were finished? Yes,
I may have been under some kind of illusion, but I
felt like an engineer. And I didn't get a chance to
prove it, because in 32, when I graduated, there
was absolutely no one that had a job to go to to find
out. As far as I know, not one of my class had a job.
Not even one. They want most of them home to work in
their father's business or something else, just
because there were no jobs. When I was a junior, I
had the promise of three jobs open to me as soon as I
graduated. They were anxious to have me. But hell,
even the guys that were hiring me were not even
there when I graduated. No kidding. They'd been
closed down.
things were in pretty bad shape.
I went back to San Angelo and took a job with the
Texas Public Service Company. It was a gas company
at the time. Digging a ditch for two dollars a day as
a chemical engineer. And I expect I was doing just
about as well as most of the rest of my classmates.
The jobs just were not there. Often during
conversations you hear people say that there's
something special or something unique about
Texas A&M. Do you think there is something
special?
Yes, I think the whole school is special. If it were
just a special thing it probably wouldn't last.
It's a whole combination of things that make it
special.
One, I think, of the biggest of those in the
beginning and on through to now has been the
military and the discipline that is involved in
it. I know a lot of people are not interested in
hearing that, but it's still a fact. the further we
go away from it, the less individual it's going to
be, or the less special it's going to be.
Maybe there's something else that can generate a
special condition, but right off hand I can't
think what it's going to be. But it provided a means
for people to get to, people meaning students, to
be forced to know each other, and to be forced to
learn some things that their families couldn't
teach them, and to get on their own feet early.
And then I think that makes for a special
situation.
Because despite the fact that a lot of the schools
in Texas used to like to compare us farm boys and
people from the dairy barns, even to the extent of
saying that we smell that way,
the NMP people still stood out in groups that
included students from other colleges.
That's not to say that they weren't fine guys in
other colleges, but overall the N.M. guy still
stood out.
He didn't always smell like a red bar. I was
wondering about your military colonel. Let's
start in on that. In 1932 you graduated and then you
first started your air training in 1933. During
that one year interval then you were digging
ditches. That's right. How did you get into the
Army Air Corps? Half of them. I graduated to
troubleshooters helper before I got to the end of
that year. How did I do that? How did you get into the
Army Air Corps?
While we were still here at A&M my senior year, a
commander of
D Battery, a man named Amy of Louisiana was just
living until he could get out of here and get into
flying.
they gave a physical exam before he graduated from
here, and he failed it. He was turned down for
entrance to flying school.
And
trying to console him when he got that news, which
was pretty hefty news when that's the only job that
you've got any prospect of getting. I said, well,
maybe you aren't so broken up, beat up physically,
that you can't find yourself a reasonable job
somewhere else.
He took it a little bit differently than I intended
it, and said, hell, I'll bet you fifty bucks you
can't pass the physical either. Well, I didn't
have that in mind, but so I told him I could, and I'd
take it then. So I applied, and it took almost a
year, about eight months before I heard from him.
And it was a long application to fill out. Well, as I
began to get closer to this, then I began to really
be interested in, sure enough, not only passing
the physical, but everything else it took to go on
and get into it and get started.
And so following up that application then, I was
notified, I don't know when November I believe it
was, that I could report to Randolph for a physical
exam.
at a certain time. I went down to Randolph, and
there were 600 people reporting in there in three
days for the same physics exam for the same class.
No kidding. And what was the size of the class? The
class was going to be about 200. And that
600 had already been weeded out of like 12,000
applications. many of whom had taken the exams
locally, physical exams, locally in Minneapolis
or wherever, and these were the ones that had
survived that. So, they were 600 out of a real big
group.
So, reported down there for that physical at the
proper time, and At the end of the first day, there
were about 20 of us left that hadn't been told we
were going home.
At the end of the second day, there were eight of us
left.
And at the end of the third day, or noon on the third
day, when they finally got through, there were
still these same eight of us left. So, eight of us
got in out of that 600. And
we didn't know it then. They just told us that
they'd pass us on a physical. But we were notified
in January, I guess it was, to report on February
20, 1933, which we did. And that year,
graduates of West Point and Naval Academy, there
was not enough money to commission
them. So the Naval Academy commissioned its upper
half, upper half of its class.
The Air Force offered the other Naval Academy
graduates, those that were not commissioned, an
opportunity to go through flying school if they
could pass the physical and other things, and be
commissioned in the Air Force Reserve. Well
fifty-something, fifty-two or three of them took
advantage of this opportunity, and so they were,
that group was there in my class in flying school.
So that's some of the vacancies went to try to take
care of that.
To indicate how bad things really were, we went on
through our year of training and there was not
money enough to commission us our second
lieutenant. When you finished? When we finished.
We went to active duty as cadets for a year, that's
right.
Well,
it happened that on the day that we graduated, my
class graduated, was the day that Franklin
Roosevelt ordered the Air Force Corps to take over
the mail.
So, I found myself a few days later, never having
been west of El Paso or north of Amarillo, flying a
mail from Cheyenne, Wyoming to Salt Lake City,
Utah in open cockpit airplanes for $75 a month,
less 15%. Why less? One of the economy measures
that was taken during that year was to cut all
military pay by 15%. Just didn't have the money in
the budget to pay it. So all of us were reduced 15%.
When you're on 75 bucks a month, they get it reduced
15%.
It hurts.
And so you graduated from the Air Corps Flying
School in February 20th, 1934, and how long did you
fly the mail? Well, they took the mail over that
day. The Air Corps took it over that day. And I went
from Randolph, where we graduated, or from Kelly,
where we graduated to Marchfield for a station in
California, and then moved on up. So, it was a month
after that before I got even close to the mail.
And we finished flying the mail on July 25th, and so
it was like two and a half months. Now, I've heard
some pretty negative responses about flying the
mail, the Army Air Corps. And as I understand,
there was a high casualty rate. There was a very
high casualty rate. You betcha.
Why was that? Why was there a high casualty rate?
Yeah. What were the problems? You're all
certified pilots. There were three or four
reasons. There were. One of them is that it turned
out that during that period of time they had the
worst weather for flying that I guess they've ever
had before or since that anyone knows about. It was
really bad. But that's not the primary reason. The
primary reason was that We had been so strapped for
money, the armed services had been, the Air Corps
in particular, that we didn't have the equipment
to do it. The equipment that we're using, of
course, was not made for it. No. We were not
equipped in terms of navigation aids, which is the
main reason for it. either in terms of having the
equipment, having it installed in the airplane,
or having the training for it.
Well, I took off from Salt Lake City in a big Curtis
B-2 bomber that I'd never been in before. It was the
biggest airplane that the United States owned at
that time. On the floor of the cockpit over in front
of my crew chief was a box about like this. And I
asked the cruiser what it was, and he said, that's
so you can receive the beam. Well, that's the first
time I ever heard of a beam, so I don't know what the
hell that meant either.
Well, it turns out, when I got an education on it
before I got back onto an airplane, after I finally
got down that night,
they had installed these stations that
transmitted in eight elliptical transmission
patterns. This one and this one were A, this one and
this one were N. And if you were in the shadow
between them, you got a solid signal. If you set the
station up and you set the shadow so it would write
down your airway, you could come in following that
steady signal and come into the station and you'd
know you were there. There wasn't a lot more to it
than that, but that's the theory. So you'd know
that you were approaching that city. That's
right, and you'd know which one it was. The
technique of doing this, though, on bad weather,
bad static, and swinging beams, and all kinds of
other things, is another matter.
how you know you're there, because you can fly
through that cone in less than a second. And this
one going out the other way sounds exactly the
same, unless you check to see whether you've got an
A or an N on your right and so forth. I mean, you have
to orient yourself. But if you didn't even know
what it was, you certainly didn't know how to use
it. That's for sure. And most of us were in that kind
of category. We hadn't even seen one yet. So the
training was another reason for our high-tech
solar grid. Oh, yes. We didn't have that to train
on. We were flying in airplanes whose service
ceiling wasn't as high as the mountains on the
routes that we were flying.
It was a real rough decision. I don't mind to say
that now, that the President ought to be for making
that kind of decision or anything like that. It had
some good things, too. It did, as I understand,
break the airline monopoly that they had,
which could have caused, did cause a hell of a
problem. But it also showed the Air Force and
showed the world that unless you did something,
you just didn't have an Air Force. You can't win a
war in PT with threes.
What about the morale? We began to get some, it was
terrible in many ways. The pilot morale? Well,
it was good despite the fact, I've forgotten how
many we lost, but it was like 80 or so pilots. You
lost 80 just from California? No, not just Cal. I'm
talking about all over. Okay. And I don't know that
that's any, I don't, that's not an exact figure,
but it's close to that.
But we understood why we lost them and we just tried
every way in the world that we could try to assure
that we weren't the next one and So was the pilot
morale good then or bad? You said horrible at
first, and I said I was a morale man. No, you said I
was a morale man. I was thinking about overall,
everybody, and I said terrible. Okay, so overall
it was different then? Yeah. The pilot morale, as
such, I think was very good. Very good. Why was it
different between the entire Army Air Corps and
the pilots?
people just didn't see very much sense in it. Yet
the pilot saw that it was extremely important
because it was going to have to tell us what we had to
do, and it was going to have to tell the nation what
it was going to have to do before
we could be a fighting unit.
I think it was good. I lost some mighty good friends
and damn near became one of them myself. You had a
close call? Oh yeah, well I've had several. Where
was that? It was Salt Lake City.
I'd come in to land and just a cold that couldn't
retain your consciousness and